In scientific computing, but in
fact in computing in general,
input is very often
stored in files.
And of course, when
you have results
those will be written to files.
So in general, I/O is
perceived as a bit boring,
but in fact that's not really
true because performance often
depends on how well you do
your input/output So here
we'll deal with fairly
straightforward text input
and output, and we'll reserve
some more sophisticated topics
for later.
So we do a very simple
computation in a do loop.
We just multiply an integer
with x being initialized
to 5.1, nothing special.
OK.
We want to write result
to a file though.
So the first thing that we
need to do is to open the file,
and this we do with
open statement.
We always have to
specify a unit number,
and this is actually
just an integer.
So we could choose
one ourselves or--
and that's better practise-- we
could have the Fortran runtime
choose one for us.
And this is done using
the newunit attribute.
And we just provide
an integer variable,
which will be assigned
a proper unit number.
Then we specified a file,
and it's just a string,
it denotes a filename.
We set the access, and
that would be sequential,
so we plan to write this file
from beginning to the end.
And the action we take is write.
The status is
replace, that means
that if the file does not
exist, it will be created.
If the file does exist though,
it will be overwritten.
Status could also be
new in this case, which
means that if it does
not exist, it's created.
If it does exist,
the application
will exit with an error message.
And finally, we have
the form, and we
choose formatted since
we want textual output.
Then we have the write
statement in a do loop,
and that takes the unit number.
So that is associated with
the file we were writing to.
And it also takes a
formal specification,
the fmt argument.
And this is a description of
what a textual representation
of our data would look like.
F means that it's
a floating point
value, in this case
with a width of 3,
and one digit after
the decimal dot.
That is followed by the value
which you want to write,
i times x in this case.
So when all iterations are
done and all our computations
are done and
written to the file,
we have to close
the file. Otherwise
we might end up
with corrupt files.
And for this we used
a close statement,
and we just have to provide the
unit number which is associated
with this particular file.
We can now build the
application and run it,
and inspect the file.
And as you can see,
there is an issue.
The first two values
are OK, 0 and 5.1,
that's what we expect when we
multiply 5.1 by 0 and by 1.
But then the output
is just asterisks,
and that's a problem.
So what went wrong?
The result of the third
iteration is in fact 10.2,
and that's a width
of four characters.
We specified a format
specifier with three,
and that's a problem
for the Fortran runtime.
So it will replace the
output by asterisks
in order to indicate that
the format specifier was not
sufficient in width
to display the data.
So that's something
we shall need to fix.
Although the programme
actually worked,
it's not really good practise
because with I/O operations
something can go wrong, and you
should actually test for that.
The way to do that is to
provide some extra arguments
in the open statement,
like iostat and iomsg.
iostat is just an
integer, and it
will be set to 0 if
everything went fine,
to a non-zero value
if there was an issue.
iomsg is a string,
and here we've
taken a string of length 1024
just to be on the safe side.
And that will be set to a
meaningful error message,
depending on what went
wrong in the open statement.
So for instance, it could be
that a file cannot be created
and because there's no write
permission in the directory,
and then you would get a
meaningful error message.
So after the open statement, we
check the value of the status.
And if it's non-zero, then we
write an error message and we
stop the programme.
Of course, error handling could
be a bit more sophisticated.
Other things are possible.
We do the same thing
in the write statement.
So also we provide the extra
arguments, iostat and iomsg,
and again we check for
a non-zero value of stat
in the next if statement, and
we handle potential problems.
For instance, here we
could have an issue
if we write a large file to disk
and actually the disk quota
gets exceeded.
And of course, we should also
fix the format specifier.
And basically here we choose
for width of 8 and 1 digit
after the decimal dot,
which should be plenty.
When we build and run
the programme and display
the results, you see that indeed
now we get properly formatted
output.
Reading a file is similar
to writing a file.
The first thing to do is
to open the file, again
with the open statement, very
similar to the one for writing
except that now the action is
read and the status is old.
So that means that file
is required to exist.
And of course just
as before, we check
the value passed
to iostat in order
to see whether something went
wrong when opening the file.
For the read statement,
we also specify
iostat and iomsg to check
whether things went fine,
but we use it for
different purposes as well.
So if we reach the
end of the file,
stat will have a specific value.
And that is defined in the
iso_fortran_env module.
It's a constant, which
is called iostat_end.
So if stat is equal
to iostat_end,
we simply end the do loop
by an exit statement.
Of course, we also have to
verify that the read as such
went fine, so if stat
would be larger than 0,
then there is an issue and
we do some error handling.
So another thing to note here
is the format passed to the read
statement, fmt is asterisk.
So basically that means that the
Fortran runtime should actually
use the type of the variables
passed in the read statement,
so in this case x of
type real, in order
to do the correct
conversion from string
representation of a
floating point value
to a real value in Fortran.
And of course, when
we're done reading
we should also close
the file as usual.
When we build and run the code,
we get the expected results.
So we get the square
of each number
that was in the file data.txt.
So as I already
mentioned, there's
a lot more to say
about I/O. However,
this is enough to
get you started.
And later on we will
discuss other topics
such as binary I/O, which
gives you better performance,
and also other access
modes that give you
some features that may be
interesting for certain use
cases.